docs: OTel logging agent configuration proposal (#1868)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/018-otel-logging-agent-configuration.md

# 18. OTel Logging Agent Setup

Date: 2025-02-18

## Status
Proposed

## Context
This document builds upon the previous ADR [17. Fault Tolerant OTel Logging Setup](./017-fault-tolerant-otel-logging-setup.md).

> The goal of this document is to have an implementation-ready log agent configuration. Following points will be consider:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this document is to have an implementation-ready log agent configuration. The following points are considered:
```

> 1. Given that every LogPipeline gets its own OTelPipeline; How will the namespace filtering actually happen? (dedicated vs shared tail receiver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Given that every LogPipeline gets its own OTelPipeline, what mechanism will be used for the namespace filtering? Dedicated vs shared tail receiver.
```

> 2. Agent will have no explicit batching mechanism configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The agent will have no explicit batching mechanism configured.
```

> 3. Agent will have no sending queue mechanism configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The agent will have no sending queue mechanism configured.
```

> 4. Agent will send logs directly to the OTLP exporter (no gateway involved).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The agent will send logs directly to the OTLP exporter (no gateway is involved).
```

> 5. Relevant gateway logic will be copied to the agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Relevant gateway logic will be copied to the agent.
```

> ### Explored solutions to the namespace filtering problem:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Explored Solutions to the Namespace Filtering Problem
```

The following solutions have been explored and proposed for the namespace filtering issue:

![Namespace Filtering - Explored Solutions](../assets/logs-otel-agent.drawio.svg)

Although **solution 1.2** is more performance efficient, its implementation complexity led the team to choose **solution 2** instead.

Another consideration could be the number of LogPipelines generally used on each active cluster. This can be probed with the following PromQL query:

```
count_values("LogPipelines/shoot", count by (shoot) (count by (shoot,name) (kube_customresource_telemetry_logpipeline_condition)))
```

Leading to the following results for the production environment (as of this writing):
| LogPipelines/shoot | shoots |  ~%   |
| :----------------: | :----: | :---: |
|         1          |   53   | 18.8% |
|         2          |  206   |  73%  |
|         3          |   9    | 3.2%  |
|         4          |   13   | 4.6%  |
|         5          |   1    | 0.4%  |

> This means that some performance drawbacks due to duplicated tailing can still be expected, in going with **solution 2**. But this is however highly dependent on the pipelines' configuration. With this information at hand, we know what to optimize for, given that the vast majority of clusters (i.e. 91.8%) have 2 or fewer LogPipelines configured. This results in the same log files being tailed a maximum of two times (in the worst case scenario) for >90% of the clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that some performance drawbacks due to duplicated tailing can still be expected, in going with **solution 2**. But this is however highly dependent on the pipelines' configuration. With this information at hand, we know what to optimize for, given that the vast majority of clusters (i.e. 91.8%) have 2 or fewer LogPipelines configured. This results in the same log files being tailed a maximum of two times (in the worst-case scenario) for >90% of the clusters.
```
